JUDY WOODRUFF: It has been just
over two years since the Iran
nuclear agreement was signed
under the Obama administration.
But President Trump may very
well be on the way toward
pulling the United States out of
the deal.
John Yang has that.
JOHN YANG: Candidate Donald
Trump ran against the agreement,
but President Trump has twice
followed the State Department's
advice, and certified that
Iran is complying with it.
But now, in a Wall Street
Journal interview published
today, Mr. Trump indicates he's
willing to overrule the State
Department when the next
certification is due in October.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We have given
them the benefit of every doubt.
We're doing very
detailed studies.
And, personally, I have
great respect for my people.
If it was up to me,
I would have had them
noncompliant 180 days ago.
QUESTION: Do you expect
them to be declared
noncompliant next time?
DONALD TRUMP: Personally, I do.
JOHN YANG: What would it
mean if Mr. Trump said
Iran is not complying?
What's at stake here?
We get two views.
First, Rob Malley is
here in the studio.
As special assistant to
President Obama, he was the lead
senior White House negotiator
for the agreement.
He is now a vice president of
the International Crisis Group.
And joining us from
Toronto is Mark Dubowitz.
He is chief executive
of the Foundation for
Defense of Democracies,
a Washington, D.C.-based
think tank.
He has been advising the Trump
administration on Iran policy.
Rob, let me start with you.
What's your response to
what the president said?
I should point out that, in that
interview, he went on to say
that he thinks Iran is taking
advantage of this country.
He said: "They have taken
advantage of a president
named Barack Obama who
didn't know what the
hell he was doing."
ROBERT MALLEY, Middle East
Program Director, International
Crisis Group: I'll respond to
that, but let's get
the facts straight.
We have now, since President
Trump has been in office, twice,
they -- the administration
certified that Iran was
in compliance of the deal.
Twice, the administration waived
the sanctions, which is a way
of indicating that it's mutually
reciprocal.
This is the administration's
response to the fact that Iran
is doing its share, we do our
share.
Twice, the agency, the
international agency
that's responsible for
deciding whether -- decides
on compliance -- whether Iran is
in compliance with its nuclear
restrictions, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, twice
since Trump has been in office,
it has said that Iran is living
up to its deal.
And, twice, the joint
commission, which is a
commission formed by all
of the member countries
that negotiated the deal,
including the United
States, twice, including
recently, they have
said that Iran is in compliance.
So maybe the president has
information that he hasn't
shared with anyone else.
But, at this point, it's clear
that for almost every objective
observer, every objective
observer -- the subjective
observers may have another view
-- but every objective observer
has said Iran is in compliance.
So, I don't know where he
comes up with saying that he
knows, but others don't know.
Even his Cabinet disagrees,
apparently, but he knows that
Iran is not in compliance.
So, that really would
be breaking our own
obligations under the
deal, but also breaking
with our allies, which would put
us in a very difficult position.
JOHN YANG: Mark Dubowitz, you
are advising the administration.
I presume you wouldn't want
to talk about that advice,
make that advice public.
But what should the
president should do?
What do you think the
president should do when this
next certification comes up?
MARK DUBOWITZ, Foundation for
the Defense of Democracies:
So, the president should make
it very clear that Iran is not
in compliance with the deal.
It's been very clear.
And Secretary Tillerson's letter
to Congress again made it very
clear that there are incremental
violations of the deal.
The president actually didn't
certify that Iran is in full
compliance with the deal.
He merely said that Iran
meets certain conditions
that were laid by Congress,
which didn't require
full compliance.
So, my advice to the president
would be state the facts,
which is, Iran is incrementally
violating the deal, but unless
there's a material breach of the
JCPOA, the nuclear deal, don't
go to the joint commission,
don't snap back the
U.N. sanctions, but
use that noncompliance
as a predicate to roll out
a much more comprehensive
Iran policy that deals
with all forms of Iranian
malign behavior, not only
nuclear misbehavior, but Iran's
malign behavior across multiple
fronts.
That's a full, comprehensive
policy, and it gets us away
from this myopic focus on the
nuclear deal, which I think
paralyzed U.S.-Iran policy
under President Obama.
JOHN YANG: Rob Malley, myopic
focus on the nuclear deal?
Or should there be consideration
of things, a broader
consideration, as he says?
ROB MALLEY: There should,
there has been, and there
will continue to be.
I mean, what the Obama
administration, what
President Obama did was
take one issue, which
was a critical issue, not only
our national security experts,
but Israeli and other experts
said, if Iran were to rush
to a bomb, we would be in
a very difficult situation.
Let's look at the
case of North Korea.
We wouldn't want to see a North
Korea in the Persian Gulf.
So, that was a priority at
that point wasn't not to
give up on the other issues.
Let's at least make sure
that Iran is not in a
position to get a bomb.
At the same time, let's
push back on their
regional activities,
let's see what we can
do about their ballistic
missiles, but the deal itself --
and deliberately -- was about
this issue.
It wasn't a case of myopia.
It was a case of, we're
going to deal with the issue.
We solved it, at least
for the time being.
And let's work on the other
issues at the same time.
There is nothing in the nuclear
deal that would prevent us
from taking action against
Iran if it engaged in
terrorism, ballistic missiles,
human rights violations.
The question at the heart
of what the president
said is whether we are
going to continue to
honor our part of the deal,
to make sure that Iran also
honors its part and doesn't rush
to a nuclear bomb, so
that we don't have what
we now in North Korea.
North Korea, we have a country
that has a nuclear bomb,
and we have no visibility on
what they're doing.
In Iran, we have a country that
doesn't have a nuclear bomb,
and we have almost maximum
visibility as a result of
the deal in every aspect
of their nuclear program.
JOHN YANG: Mark Dubowitz,
what about that, the idea that
it's better to know what is
going on, to work within
this agreement and know
what Iran is doing?
MARK DUBOWITZ: Well, I'm glad
Rob brought up the fatally
flawed North Korea nuclear
agreement, because the
Iran nuclear agreement is
similarly fatally flawed.
It contains within it
sunset provisions, where
the restrictions of
Iran's nuclear program
actually go away over time, and
Iran can emerge, by actually
faithfully complying with the
deal, with an industrial sized
nuclear program, with near zero
nuclear breakout capability,
with a much easier covert
sneak-out capability
with an ICBM, with a
powerful economy fortified
against our ability to
use sanctions, and with
increased regional hegemony.
So, Rob is right.
The deal temporarily pushed the
Iranians further in terms of
breakout, but over the medium
term, Iran is going to emerge
with everything it wants by
faithfully complying with the
deal.
So, we don't want another
fatally flawed nuclear agreement
like we had with North Korea.
What we need to start dealing
with is this flawed agreement.
And I think the president has
already made it very clear that
he thinks this is a terrible
deal, he thinks it's
a fatally flawed deal.
And I think my advice to him
is don't certify compliance
and begin to lay the predicate
for a massive pressure campaign
and get the Iranians back
to the table to negotiate a
nuclear deal number two that
addresses some of these fatally
flawed elements of the deal,
and, by the way, give us
inspection rights into military
sites, which, right now, we
have in theory, but, in
practice, the Iranians
aren't letting us into
their military sites,
where they're likely to engage
in nuclear weaponization
activities like they have in
the past.
So, we better rectify this
fatally flawed deal, or the
Iranians are going to a nuke,
ICBMs, and they're going to have
the ability to dominate like
nothing we have seen before.
JOHN YANG: Rob Malley, what
would be the consequences?
What is at stake here?
What would be the consequences
if the president did say Iran
is not living up to this deal?
ROB MALLEY: Well, first, I
have to say, I'm a little bit
confused about argument that
Mark was making.
Is the argument that the deal is
fatally flawed and, therefore,
we shouldn't accept it, we
should walk away, we
should renegotiate it,
which would be one path?
Very dangerous.
And I won't get into that.
Or is his view, the deal is
OK for now, but in 12, 13, 14,
15 years, as some provisions
are going to expire, and
so we should think of
whether we can negotiate
what happens afterwards,
but in which case we're
going to give something
to Iranians in return.
Nobody is going to -- the
Iranians are not going to accept
to negotiate more restrictions
in exchange for nothing.
So, I think we need to clarify.
Right now, we're in a much
better position than we were at
the time President Obama took
office, because we have
these restrictions.
And according to every
inspection that has been done,
every report by the IAEA, Iran
is in compliance.
Now, if tomorrow, the president
were to decide to announce
that Iran is not in compliance,
first of all, I think we
would have a little bit of
deja vu in terms of Iraq.
I think most people in the
international community
would believe that
we're just fabricating
evidence, because we
haven't shared it, because,
right now, we're the only
ones who are claiming
that Iran is not in --
or we would be the only
ones claiming that.
That would not put us
in a strong position.
If we were to do that, and
that is it, and continue to
honor the deal, it would be a
hiccup.
It would once again signal
to the world that we have a
rather erratic administration.
If he were then to impose
sanctions, to reimpose
the sanctions that were
lifted, reimpose sanctions
on Iran's nuclear program,
then we would be in breach.
And either Iran would itself
say we're not only bound by
our own commitments, and we
have a possibility of Iran
trying to acquire a nuclear
bomb, or we would be isolated in
the international
community, because the
Europeans, the Russians,
the Chinese, everyone would
say, it's on you.
It's not on Iran.
Why would we want that?
JOHN YANG: Mark Dubowitz, let
me -- I want you to respond.
What would happen?
What practically would
happen if the president
said they weren't complying?
And then what should
the next step be?
MARK DUBOWITZ: Well, actually,
practically speaking, what
Rob's not telling you is that,
if the president says they're
not complying, but he doesn't
say that they're in material
breach, then actually
nothing happens.
Then we don't go to
the joint commission.
We don't snap back U.N.
and U.S. sanctions.
We merely say Iran is engaging
in incremental violations.
And we know that the Iranians
violate incrementally,
not egregiously, even
though, over time, the
sum total of the incremental
violations is always egregious.
What Rob's not telling
you is that he knows and
we know that the Iranians
have been incrementally
violating this deal.
They have exceeded
heavy water caps.
Heavy water is the
essential ingredient you
need for a plutonium bomb.
They're testing more advanced
centrifuges than they are
permitted under the nuclear
agreement.
They have been illicitly
procuring nuclear and ballistic
missile technology in Germany,
according to German
intelligence services.
And they have exceeded
their enrichment cap.
So, the fact of the matter
is, there are violations.
They're not material breaches.
They're incremental violations.
The president should state
that, certify that, and say
Iran is not in full compliance.
Now, the second step is to say
whether it's a material breach.
And it's.
It's not a material breach.
And he should move ahead with
the maximum pressure campaign.
JOHN YANG: Mark
Dubowitz, I'm sorry.
We're out of time.
Mark Dubowitz, Rob Malley, we're
going to have to leave it there.
Thank you, gentlemen.
ROB MALLEY: Thank you.
MARK DUBOWITZ: Thanks so much.